The Joe Rogan experience.
So Yoelle you got a good grasp of English. Pretty good.
Joey's gonna help fill in the blanks and, uh,
we'll be able to have some good communication here.
You guys did a podcast last night? Yes. In Spanish.
Yes. Spanish spangl and English shoot.
We started in English and it went into spanglishsh and I just wanna them know
how wanted of the people to know who the hell your Rome was?
We talked about Cuba and his, uh, humble beginnings,
how he went to school from Monday to Fridays at a pyramid and you just wrestled
and that's how they do it in Cuba.
Then you go up to pyramid and how he only went home on the weekends, a pyramid,
meaning it's a pyramid school and PLE likequeeb,
um.
It's a system.
It starts at about seven years old,
All the Cuba start that way. Wow. And you go up to pyramid,
but you,
you stay there for the week and they educate you. They feed you.
You sleep there, you wrestle there, you wrestle. Um,
You wake up in the morning.
Sorry. um< seven.
In the morning.
Everyth. Everything.
Is by a schedule. Everything is run by a schedule. Militaristic style.
Seven, eight breakfast.
Yeah. Yeah.
Eight to 12 squiil school-hmm <affirmative> you went to school.
Story history.
The basic mathema, mathematics, um.
Uh, physical physics.
Everything. How did.
They decide what sport you compete in? Like how did you choose wrestling?
Was that just something that you loved or was it, did you like other sports?
Like how did you choose to focus on wrestling.
Que.
No. Yo in the beginning, I want to make it boxing, boxing,
boxing. My daddy, uh, you know, for the family, for my dad, uh, uh,
is boxing and wrestling people is my family wrestling, um, and boxing,
but I love boxing in the beginning. My dad said, no, it's
I don't like it.
You make it probably boxing because boxing is too much punching in the face-hmm
<affirmative> it's not good. It's not good. But you know, I'm in the beginning,
make it boxing as by he would.
Hide it from his dad. Oh really? Yeah.
Six years old. He was boxing and would hide it from his dad,
Little Ramos, the Olympic, uh, whatever, 1980.
He would sneak around.
With him. UN.
He would learn with him how to box hiding from his dad. Ah.
So when did you focus on just wrestling? Like when did wrestling take over?
Okay. Um, we in my city,
um, everybody know my family, you know, uh,
one coach for wrestling joseun he see me and,
and I go to.
There's a lot of trainers in the pyramid.
Bank.
Ice> they go to the schools.
I would call talents and.
To look for talent, you.
Know?
And they do tryouts.
It dependt on you to, depending.
On what, how you doing the test sting when you go to that. So it's just like,
uh, they go, they evaluate you and then they decide what's best for you.
Hmm. For example, you coach for boxing. I called for judo.
Joe is a coach. Um.
Boxing. No, no.
Tawondo, tawondo something like this. Okay. We say, okay,
we go to tomorrow for, for a school.
And we test the people for the, for the kid, you know, you do it, you,
you test it for the boxing. I do it for wrestling. And you do it for,
for Taek one though, TA one, you know, and now you see, see the,
she 10 kid,
you got a 10 kid and you see who is the best? Who are the, the,
the talent for boxing. Mm. Maybe you see, okay for boxing.
Good. Maybe not good. And but you say, you see, you can see, say, oh,
for boxing, no good. But for taiwano Hey, joy, this guy, I,
I have a talent for your sport. And now, you know, like this. Mm.
And that is thedominant theing in Cuba. You know, the people take it when they,
when the kid is, uh, very young, you know, and go to the,
for the special school for sport, you know,
lapal mass.
The lowest level.
Ma pray.
80.
The.
Lowest level.
Pray. 80 Thema,
80.
80. That's the second level. Yeah.
The, the second, the cell level is, um.
Esppa, espba PA.
ESP.
ESP. That's the highest level. That is the.
Junior junior. Okay.
Junior.
They play the SIS Spanish.
Then you get the selection to be.
National. Yeah. Like a Olympic center.
Like that, the Olympic center. So they take it to a different center.
So you keep going up, like, until you get to like the UFC training.
Facility, Matt brown told me that he did his camp for,
I think it was the mikepyle fight. Did his camp in Cuba? Yes. And he said,
it's just tremendous talent. He said,
he just couldn't believe how good the boxers were, how good the wrestlers were.
It was just unbelievable. Yeah.
I, I hear he, that Matt brown stay in Cuba. I hear.
Yeah. For six weeks. Yeah. He.
Stayed and, and, and ma my.
He went to the highest level when he was down there.
Yeah. Yeah. He said he got worked.
Decent.
I know. Good guys, man. He said they were good.
Adam MIMO. I think
central Olympico.
He thinks he can't even go back there to that Senti. Now, now they would.
Now they would spank him at his age. Wow.
I tease him. I tease him. I teach. So <laugh> I think.
I it's crazy crazy when you were there. Um, Matt,
one of the things that Matt was saying,
and Matt brown had tremendous respect for the Cuban athletes.
And you said it an amazing, amazing system that they produce. Great,
great talent. But he's saying that as you get higher and higher levels,
your accommodations are better. Where you sleep is better. Your food,
you get more food. No.
My hope going a lot. UN.
It's a lot of incentive to improve. It's true.
Yeah.
It's, it's hard to say, but it's a reality, but he's gonna tight.
Queque.
He went to a lot of Olympic centers all over the world.
An Nu Nu
de.
The number five and the number six wrestlers from those countries
Eats the same as number one In Cuba.
It's not like that.
Understand.
If you're number three, you don't eat what number one eats.
And you're not gonna eat the same as number two, either
The number one guy has the most privilege. It's good. And it's bad.
Que.
Because it pushes you to be the best you want to get more's food.
What's that part.
That not.
Everybody has, could be the best of what they're doing. Right. That's.
The
right. Um, you're not gonna have.
The privilege to give lobster. Yeah.
But if you look at how small Cuba is,
but how many great talents have come from Cuba, obviously it's effective.
I mean, it ha it has its merits, right? Like that system it's a brutal system,
but it seems to be very effective in producing super high level athletes.
They ain't gimme no trophies for second place. There's no. Yeah, no, there's no.
Unto.
You don't want, there comes a point where you don't want the trophy anymore.
To, to get a.
You want to eat with the best guys. You want to sit with the best guys eating.
Okay. I.
Got third place, but who gives a?
The people see the champ, you know, the people want to touch the champ.
The people want, wanna stayed on the, where the, the champs stay.
And that's where the people wanted. You know, the number three, number four,
we say, I wanna stay. Okay. I take the twelft. I stay, uh, the, my,
the medal. Okay. But I want the feeling where the champ feeling, you know?
Right. You know, I want to walk on the, where the people work.
I want to stay, eat. I want to, the, the people talk like me.
When the people talk to the champion, that's what the people, the, the,
the system push, you know? Right.
And that's what I say every time, every time, that's what I say.
The system push you. Like
thisun.
The more that the guy that trains the most,
the system is <inaudible> is the best, you know?
And you, every time, every time you see, look at this,
you take for,
because stay in the national team for
almost 15. <inaudible> 15. Yeah.
15 years I staying in the olympicmp center. Um,
you can imagine it stay with the 10
guys for 15 years.
And the 15 years, 10 guys, I want to kill you. <laugh>
You carry pressure. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Listen,
UN some building, you know, mm-hmm, <affirmative> some building
and it's.
A building with a lot of rooms.
Sorry. That's in my room.
That's the room for the another guy. But this guy, the same,
the division, right. Everybody told him,
he can see for 15 years everything, what you doing? Everything, what? You eat,
everything where you, when you sick, everything, he know you about, about you,
everything.
Hmm. So you live with your opponents, right? Right. They know when you're sick,
they know it's not like where, when you're fighting, uh,
Matt brown and he he's in Kentucky and you're in Denver training,
nobody knows what's going on right there. They train.
So you know what I'm doing? And I know what you're doing. Ah,
so we're all on the same floor. They do it like that to build that ver you know,
whatever the hell that building advers between adversity. Yeah. For sure.
Yeah. So how come on you, do you know.
How you prepare yourself mentally for that? How do.
You.
You have to become a machine machine.
But not, but it is not only machine in the fight, in, in the fight. No, no,
no machine in your life. Yeah.
When you're sick.
If he broke something, this guy not only one, he says 10 guys. Hmm.
You know,
I.
You got that. No,
you have to become a machine inside and out and out because those 10 guys know
when you're sick. Right. You know, they know when you get hurt.
So now I'm training with you. But I saw that you hurt your wrist in training.
I'm going after that wrist. Right. Right, right. You know what I'm saying? Like,
it's just, it's, it's, it's intense.
So that's why he's the machine is,
he says it only trains you to be a machine on the outside.
It also trains you to be a machine on the inside.
And Joe, listen, this's a very important tool
I come for, for, for the, for pina de R city push up. Okay.
There you go. Thank you. I coming for the pin R city
sometime, you know it.
Everything is with ages.
No,
no.
In Cuba, you don't fight. If you're 12, you don't fight a 17 year old.
You fight somebody. Who's your age.
They put you always with people that are your age.
A categors.
They call it categories.
You know.
Is 11 to 12. Just like that.
Yeah. Like this, you know, mm-hmm
UN when.
You get to the highest level.
I was in contracting contracting
one of the D.
You're gonna find people with different ages. E.
The D da.
And from different cities in Cuba, in Cuba, all over. No, no, no.
In Cuba. Okay. The Cuba listen, Pedro,
when.
You get to the room.
UN and toun.
You could find people from those cities that you're gonna fight against in your
own room.
But, but listen,
butun the UN 180 4.
That 1 55. Sorry.
I
UN and.
Each room, there'll be five people.
Two.
You're from Boston.
Boston, right. To Boston. Just saw the Miami.
He's the New Jersey, New Jersey
And another.
Room in the other room.
Is a fight guy too. Mmhmm <affirmative>. But one guy is my division,
but it's the same for you. Start,
you understand now for the same city, right? And now you Frank for him.
Mm-hmm <affirmative>. I am not careful because when I stay in the room,
you see everything. Hey, you can tell him, Hey,
because maybe you, the, the, the friendun you're.
The best in your division.
He, he told me oruno and your friend.
Is the second best. And he says, wait.
UN.
Yeah. So you guys get to talk. So now you always have spies watching you,
right. For.
15 Years, 15 years.
When did you leave? When? With.
2002 7, 2007, say re uh,
1 8 90, 95. And I,
I leave 2007. How did you leave?
UN see, um, I go to the grand PRS tournament.
Grandixs and Germany in, in the, uh,
city mm-hmm <affirmative> citylycy city. Germany. Mm-hmm <affirmative> yeah.
Thank you. <laugh> um, I, um,
for four months before, I, I,
I think about it, this decision, I say,
when I stay in ye I know, go, go back Cuba. You know,
I want to make it my, my dream new life, you know?
What did you think you were gonna do though?
Did you think you were gonna fight MMA back then? Cuz there wasn't.
I want to try it. I, and I, I say I wanna do the,
is mm-hmm <affirmative> I wanna do this, but you never know.
You never know what the, the, the, the, the life give you, you know, right.